>> Thompson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY MARCH, 26: MORE
SUSPECTS ARE CHARGED WITH AIDING
THE TERRORISTS WHO CARRIED OUT
THIS WEEK'S ATTACKS IN BELGIUM,
INCLUDING A MAN SEEN WITH
SUICIDE BOMBERS AT THE BRUSSELS
AIRPORT; IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, WORKERS AND BUSINESSES
STRUGGLE TO STRIKE A BALANCE
BETWEEN WAGES AND TIPS.
>> THERE ARE SOME DAYS THE TIPS
ARE AMAZING, BUT THEN THERE'S
OTHER DAYS THAT I'M MAKING
NOTHING.
>> Thompson: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
BELGIUM HAS LEVIED ITS FIRST
CRIMINAL CHARGES RELATED TO THE
TERRORIST ATTACKS ON THE
BRUSSELS AIRPORT AND A SUBWAY
STATION EARLIER THIS WEEK.
TODAY, BELGIAN PROSECUTORS
ACCUSED THREE MEN IN CUSTODY
WITH "INVOLVEMENT IN THE
ACTIVITIES OF A TERRORIST
GROUP."
THAT GROUP-- THE ISLAMIC STATE
IN IRAQ AND SYRIA, BETTER KNOWN
AS "ISIS" OR "ISIL"-- CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE ATTACKS.
THE ACCUSED INCLUDE A MAN SEEN
IN AIRPORT SECURITY VIDEO
WEARING A HAT AND LIGHT-COLORED
COAT, PUSHING A LUGGAGE CART
ALONGSIDE TWO SUICIDE BOMBERS
MOMENTS BEFORE THEY BLEW
THEMSELVES UP.
THE THIRD MAN, IDENTIFIED AS
FAYSAL CHEFFOU BY BELGIAN MEDIA
AND A EUROPEAN OFFICIAL, WAS
ARRESTED THURSDAY AND IS ALSO
CHARGED WITH "TERRORIST MURDER."
IN BRUSSELS TODAY, MOURNERS LAID
WREATHS AND EVEN BOTTLES OF
BELGIAN BEER AT A MAKESHIFT
MEMORIAL FOR VICTIMS.
THE BRUSSELS PROSECUTOR SAYS 24
OF THE 28 PEOPLE KILLED IN THE
ATTACKS HAVE NOW BEEN
IDENTIFIED, AND 11 OF THEM WERE
NON-BELGIANS.
TWO WERE AMERICAN.
93 OF THE WOUNDED ARE STILL
BEING TREATED IN A MILITARY
HOSPITAL, SOME FOR SERIOUS
BURNS, MANY FOR BURST EARDRUMS.
THE BRUSSELS SUBWAY SYSTEM HAS
REOPENED, BUT THE HEAVILY
DAMAGED AIRPORT WILL NOT REOPEN
EVEN PARTIALLY BEFORE TUESDAY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA TODAY PROMISED
BELGIAN INVESTIGATORS ALL THE
HELP THEY NEED AND TO CONTINUE
THE U.S. FIGHT AGAINST ISLAMIC
STATE MILITANTS OVERSEAS.
>> A RELENTLESS AIR CAMPAIGN AND
SUPPORT FOR FORCES IN IRAQ AND
SYRIA WHO ARE FIGHTING ISIL ON
THE GROUND HAS ALLOWED US TO
TAKE APPROXIMATELY 40% OF THE
POPULATED TERRITORY THAT ISIL
ONCE HELD IN IRAQ.
>> Thompson: FOR MORE ON THE
SECURITY QUESTIONS RAISED IN THE
UNITED STATES BY THE TERRORIST
ATTACKS IN BELGIUM, I AM JOINED
BY "WASHINGTON POST" NATIONAL
SECURITY REPORTER ADAM GOLDMAN,
WHO IS IN WASHINGTON.
SO, ADAM, CAN WE JUST FIRST
START OUT, THE HOW MANY, HOW
HAVE TERRORIST ATTACKS IN
IN BRUSSELS CHANGED THE WAY
SECURITY OFFICIALS IN US WILL DO
THEIR JOBS.
>> I THINK WHAT U.S. TERRORISM
OFFICIALS TAKE AWAY FROM
BRUSSELS IS THAT ISIS IS LOOKING
TO THE WEST IN WAYS PERHAPS THEY
HADN'T THOUGHT BEFORE, AND I
THINK FOR U.S. COUNTERTERRORISM
OFFICIALS THEY ARE GOING TO KEEP
DIGGING DOWN AND TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT WHO WENT TO SYRIA
FROM THE UNITED STATES AND FROM
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES.
>> Thompson: SO WHEN IT COMES
TO TRACKING AND MONITORING
POTENTIAL TERRORISTS HERE IN THE
U.S., WHAT ARE THE DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN THE SITUATION HERE IN
THIS COUNTRY AND IN EUROPE?
>> I THINK WE ARE MUCH MORE
DILIGENT AND WE HAVE THE
TERRORIST WATCH LIST AND TWO OF
THE BROTHERS WHO WERE IMPLICATED
IN THE ATTACK IN BRUSSELS WERE
ACTUALLY ON THIS WATCH LIST.
SO THAT MEANS UNITED STATES
GOVERNMENT HAD INFORMATION ABOUT
THEM.
THEY RECEIVED FROM ANOTHER
GOVERNMENT, POSSIBLY TURKEY, AND
PUT THEM ON THE WATCH LIST.
THE DIFFERENCE IS, THEY TOOK
THEM VERY SERIOUSLY, THE U.S.
OFFICIALS AND BELGIUM,
ADMITTEDLY DID NOT.
>> CAN YOU TALK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
THE MUSLIM COMMUNITIES HERE IN
THE UNITED STATES AND THOSE IN
EUROPE?
>> THERE ARE 800,000 MUSLIM
AMERICANS IN NEW YORK, THESE ARE
ASSIMILATED COMMUNITIES.
YOU LOOK ACROSS, LOOK ACROSS THE
COUNTRY IN IOWA AND COLORADO,
THERE ARE LONGSTANDING AMERICAN
MUSLIM COMMUNITIES THERE THAT
ARE COMPLETELY INTEGRATED, THEY
ARE NOT ISOLATED LIKE THESE
IMMIGRANTS IN EUROPE WHO ARE
SORT OF ON THE PERIPHERY OF
SOCIETY.
>> Thompson: BUT THE U.S. IS
NOT IMMUNE TO THE HOMEGROWN
ATTACKS, WE HAD THE SAN
BERNARDINO ATTACK, DOZENS OF
PROSECUTIONS OF PEOPLE HERE IN
THE U.S. SUSPECTED OF BEING
CONNECTED TO ISIS.
>> YES.
THAT'S RIGHT.
WE ARE CERTAINLY NOT IMMUNE AND
THAT'S WHAT MAKES US MOST
VULNERABLE ARE THE SO-CALLED
LONE WOLVES AND FALL UNDER THE
SWAY OF THE ISLAMIC STATE
PROPAGANDA OR AL QAEDA
ORGANIZATION AND ON THEIR OWN
LAUNCH THEIR ATTACKS THERE IS A
SLIGHT DIFFERENCE BETWEEN WHAT
YOU ARE SEEING IN EUROPE IS
THESE INDIVIDUALS THEY HAD GONE
TO SYRIA AND THEN RETURNED HOME
TO MOUNT ATTACKS.
THAT'S MUCH MORE DIFFICULT TO
HAPPEN IN THE U.S. SIMPLY
BECAUSE OF THE CONTROLS THAT ARE
IN PLACE TO, A, IDENTIFY PEOPLE
BEFORE THEY TRAVEL ABROAD TO
SYRIA AND THOSE ATTEMPTING TO
COME BACK, AND ALSO, YOU KNOW,
THE NUMBERS AREN'T THAT LARGE.
I THINK WE ARE TALKING, THERE
MIGHT BE ABOUT TWO DOZEN PEOPLE,
APPROXIMATELY, AMERICANS WHO ARE
FIGHTING IN SYRIA, I MEAN YOU
ARE TALKING HUNDREDS, THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE FROM EUROPE HAVE GONE
TO SYRIA.
>> Thompson: TODAY, PRESIDENT
OBAMA SPOKE ABOUT ENHANCED
COOPERATION BETWEEN AMERICAN
OFFICIALS AND BELGIAN SECURITY.
CAN YOU JUST TALK A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT WHAT THAT MIGHT LOOK LIKE
AND WHAT COOPERATION HAS BEEN UP
UNTIL NOW?
>> WELL, I THINK THEY HAVE BEEN
WORKING TOWARD BETTER
COOPERATION FOR THE PAST YEAR OR
TWO, TRYING TO GET THE EUROPEAN
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES, POLICE
DEPARTMENTS TO PROVIDE
INFORMATION ABOUT PEOPLE WHO
HAVE GONE TO SYRIA AND RETURNED
HOME.
AND FROM THE U.S. PERSPECTIVE IS
THEY WANT THAT INFORMATION AND
THEY WANT IT QUICKLY, NOT JUST
THE NAMES BUT POSSIBLE E-MAIL
ACCOUNTS, SOCIAL MEDIA ACCOUNTS,
YOU KNOW, CELLPHONE NUMBERS SO
THEY CAN TRACK THAT TO THE U.S.,
AND THEY CONTINUE TO PUSH FOR
THAT NOW.
I MEAN AS WE KNOW THE FBI IS
HELPING BELGIUM AUTHORITIES,
THEY ARE WORKING CLOSELY WITH
THEM, AND THE FBI ALSO HAS LEGAL
ATTACHEÉ THERE AT THE EMBASSY,
THEY ARE TRYING TO WORK WITH
TOGETHER AND FIGURE THIS OUT.
>> Thompson: ADAM GOLDMAN, OF
THE "WASHINGTON POST," THANKS SO
MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Thompson: IN SYRIA,
GOVERNMENT TROOPS OF PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD, BACKED BY
RUSSIAN AIR STRIKES, ARE
ADVANCING ON THE ANCIENT CITY OF
PALMYRA, WHICH WAS CAPTURED LAST
YEAR BY ISIS MILITANTS WHO
DESTROYED TEMPLES AND MONUMENTS
IN THE CITY DATING BACK 2000
YEARS.
SYRIAN STATE-RUN MEDIA BROADCAST
FOOTAGE OF SYRIAN TANKS AND
SOLDIERS ON THE ATTACK IN WHAT
HAS BECOME A CIVILIAN-FREE CITY.
RUSSIA SAYS ITS WARPLANES
CARRIED OUT 40 BOMBING MISSIONS
IN THE PAST 24 HOURS.
THE MONTH-LONG BATTLE TO RETAKE
PALMYRA IS THE SYRIAN
GOVERNMENT'S BIGGEST OFFENSIVE
YET AGAINST ISIS, WHICH IS NOT A
PARTY TO THE TRUCE BETWEEN THE
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT AND REBEL
GROUPS.
THE SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS SAYS SYRIAN SOLDIERS HAVE
NOW RETAKEN A THIRD OF PALMYRA.
VERMONT SENATOR BERNIE SANDERS
HAS WON TODAY'S DEMOCRATIC
CAUCUSES IN ALASKA AND CAPTURED
AT LEAST NINE DELEGATES TO THE
NATIONAL CONVENTION, ACCORDING
TO PROJECTIONS FROM THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS.
SANDERS WAS FAR AHEAD OF FORMER
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY
CLINTON IN EARLY RESULTS FROM
CAUCUSES IN WASHINGTON STATE,
WHERE 101 DELEGATES ARE AT
STAKE.
INCLUDING ALASKA, SANDERS TRAILS
CLINTON BY MORE THAN 700
DELEGATES.
2,383 ARE NEEDED TO SECURE THE
PARTY'S PRESIDENTIAL NOMINATION.
RESULTS ARE EXPECTED LATER FROM
DEMOCRATIC CAUCUSES IN HAWAII.
>> Thompson: IN THE COMING DAYS,
NEW YORK GOVERNOR ANDREW CUOMO
IS EXPECTED TO ANNOUNCE A DEAL
WITH THE STATE LEGISLATURE TO
RAISE THE MINIMUM WAGE TO $15 AN
HOUR STATEWIDE OVER THE NEXT
FIVE YEARS.
THAT WOULD MAKE NEW YORK THE
12th STATE PROJECTED TO GO ABOVE
THE $10-AN-HOUR MARK.
A MAJORITY OF STATES ALREADY
REQUIRE EMPLOYERS TO PAY ABOVE
THE FEDERAL MINIMUM WAGE OF
$7.25 AN HOUR.
THE MINIMUM WAGE DEBATE
PARTICULARLY AFFECTS THE FOOD
SERVICE INDUSTRY, AS SOME
RESTAURANTS ARE NOW SHIFTING
SERVERS AND BARTENDERS FROM
RELYING ON TIPS TO "NO TIPS" AND
HIGHER GUARANTEED WAGES.
THE RULES, WHICH VARY FROM STATE
TO STATE, NOT ONLY AFFECT YOUR
RESTAURANT BILL BUT MORE THAN
FOUR MILLION AMERICANS WHO RELY
ON TIPS TO MAKE A LIVING.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
ALISON STEWART WENT TO MINNESOTA
AND WISCONSIN TO COMPARE THE
DIFFERENT SYSTEMS.
THIS STORY IS PART OF OUR
ONGOING SERIES ABOUT POVERTY AND
OPPORTUNITY IN AMERICA CALLED
"CHASING THE DREAM."
>> HELLO, GENTLEMEN.
HOW ARE YOU TODAY?
>> Reporter: LESA MELBY HAS BEEN
A WAITRESS AT GRANDMA'S
RESTAURANT COMPANY IN DULUTH,
MINNESOTA, FOR 34 YEARS.
HOW MANY TABLES CAN YOU HANDLE
COMFORTABLY?
>> KIND OF A LOT.
>> Reporter: A LOT?
HOW MANY?
>> I CAN COMFORTABLY DO PROBABLY
NINE.
>> Reporter: WOW.
THAT'S IMPRESSIVE.
MELBY RELIES ON TIPS AS A CORE
PART OF HER INCOME, BUT SHE ALSO
GETS PAID MINNESOTA'S STATE
MINIMUM WAGE OF $9 AN HOUR.
IF YOU HAVE A DAY WHEN YOU GET
COMPLETELY STIFFED ON TIPS, YOU
WILL STILL TAKE HOME YOUR
MINIMUM WAGE.
>> RIGHT, RIGHT.
>> Reporter: THE FEDERAL MINIMUM
WAGE IS $7.25 AN HOUR, BUT, IN
43 STATES, EMPLOYERS ARE ALLOWED
TO PAY TIPPED WORKERS LESS--
SOME AS LITTLE AS $2.13 AN HOUR,
A FEDERAL WAGE WHICH HAS NOT
INCREASED IN 25 YEARS.
THE RATIONALE IS THAT CUSTOMER
TIPS ARE SUPPOSED TO MAKE UP THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN $2.13 AN HOUR
AND THE MINIMUM WAGE.
AND IF THE TIPPED EMPLOYEE
DOESN'T RECEIVE THE MINIMUM WAGE
THROUGH TIPS, EMPLOYERS ARE
REQUIRED TO PAY THE DIFFERENCE.
IN THE INDUSTRY, IT IS CALLED
"TOPPING UP."
IN SEVEN STATES, INCLUDING
MINNESOTA, "TOPPING UP" IS NOT
AN ISSUE BECAUSE THOSE STATES
REQUIRE EMPLOYERS TO PAY TIPPED
WORKERS THE FULL MINIMUM WAGE.
TIPS ARE CONSIDERED ADDITIONAL
INCOME.
RIGHT NEXT DOOR TO MINNESOTA,
HERE IN WISCONSIN, IT'S A
DIFFERENT ECONOMIC REALITY.
THE MINIMUM WAGE FOR TIPPED
WORKERS IN WISCONSIN IS $2.33 AN
HOUR.
SHANNON SORENSON LIVES IN EAU
CLAIRE, WISCONSIN, ABOUT AN
HOUR'S DRIVE FROM THE MINNESOTA
BORDER.
SHE'S BEEN WORKING AS A WAITRESS
FOR ABOUT SIX YEARS, AND HER
CURRENT EMPLOYER PAYS HER A
LITTLE MORE-- $3 AN HOUR BEFORE
TIPS.
SHE RECENTLY SWITCHED TO WORKING
PART-TIME.
>> THERE ARE SOME DAYS THE TIPS
ARE AMAZING.
THERE'S DAYS THAT, YOU KNOW, I'M
MAKING PROBABLY COMPARED TO
SOMEONE WITH A FOUR-YEAR DEGREE.
BUT THEN THERE'S OTHER DAYS THAT
I'M MAKING NOTHING.
IT'S SO TOUGH.
I GOT THE CAR PAYMENT, I GOT THE
BILL PAYMENT.
OH, I GOT THE CAR INSURANCE
PAYMENT, TOO.
OH, WAIT, I ALSO NEED TO EAT,
TOO.
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK YOU
COULD SURVIVE BEING A SERVER IN
WISCONSIN FULL-TIME?
>> IT WOULD BE A VERY STRESSFUL
LIFE.
VERY STRESSFUL LIVING PAYCHECK
TO PAYCHECK, NEVER REALLY
KNOWING WHAT I'M GOING TO MAKE.
I JUST, I DON'T WANT THAT.
>> Reporter: NOW, SORENSON WANTS
TO FINISH HER COLLEGE DEGREE AND
PURSUE A CAREER IN INTERIOR
DESIGN.
SHE LIKES BEING A WAITRESS AND
HER BOSSES, BUT SHE RARELY MAKES
ENOUGH TO SUPPORT HERSELF.
>> PEOPLE JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND
HOW MUCH WORK GOES INTO BEING A
WAITRESS.
AND JUST THE DAYS I DON'T GET A
LOT OF MONEY, IT'S JUST SO HARD.
AND EVERYTHING BECOMES MORE
EXPENSIVE, SO IT'S HARDER AND
HARDER.
>> Reporter: DAVID COOPER HAS
BEEN STUDYING TIPPED LABOR FOR
THE ECONOMIC POLICY INSTITUTE, A
NONPARTISAN WASHINGTON THINK
TANK.
COOPER SAYS ALMOST 15% OF TIPPED
SERVERS EARN LESS THAN THE
FEDERAL POVERTY LINE.
BUT IN STATES THAT PAY HIGHER
BASE WAGES, TIPPED WORKERS LIKE
LISA MELBY IN MINNESOTA ARE
FARING BETTER.
>> WHAT WE SEE IN THOSE STATES
IS THAT THE POVERTY RATE AMONG
TIPPED WORKERS IS DRAMATICALLY
LOWER THAN IN THE STATES WHERE
THEY'RE GETTING THE $2.13 PER
HOUR AS THEIR BASE WAGE.
SO, WHAT THAT TELLS US IS THAT,
YOU KNOW, EVEN THOUGH, IN
THEORY, THESE FOLKS IN THE OTHER
STATES ARE SUPPOSED TO BE
GETTING AT LEAST THE NORMAL
MINIMUM WAGE, SOMETHING ISN'T
ADDING UP.
>> Reporter: EVEN THOUGH
EMPLOYERS ARE SUPPOSED TO "TOP
UP" AND MAKE SURE TIPPED WORKERS
EARN THE FULL MINIMUM WAGE,
COOPER SAYS THEY DON'T ALWAYS
DO SO.
>> YOU HAVE TO DO THIS
ADDITIONAL CALCULATION OF ADDING
UP THEIR TIPS, AND COUNTING
THEIR HOURS, AND MAKING SURE
THAT THE BASE WAGE PLUS TIPS
EQUALS THE FULL MINIMUM WAGE.
IT'S COMPLICATED.
AND IT'S ALSO COMPLICATED FOR
EMPLOYERS, TOO, BECAUSE THE LAW
ISN'T ENTIRELY CLEAR ABOUT HOW
TO DO THIS CALCULATION.
>> Reporter: THE FEDERAL LABOR
DEPARTMENT HAS LOOKED INTO THIS
QUESTION.
IN THE PAST THREE YEARS, TIP
CREDIT VIOLATIONS WERE FOUND IN
OVER 1,500 INVESTIGATIONS,
RESULTING IN NEARLY $15.5
MILLION IN BACK WAGES BEING
IDENTIFIED.
EMPLOYERS ARE SUPPOSED TO MATCH
UP TO THE MINIMUM WAGE IF YOU
DON'T MAKE IT.
>> I DID NOT KNOW THAT.
>> Reporter: WHAT IF SOMEONE
SAID TO YOU, "WOW, WE'RE GOING
TO BE JUST LIKE YOUR NEIGHBORS
OVER THERE IN MINNESOTA, AND
YOU'RE GOING TO GET MINIMUM WAGE
AS YOUR BASE SALARY PLUS YOUR
TIPS"?
>> I WOULD LOVE THAT.
I ACTUALLY KNOW SOME PEOPLE WHO
USED TO WORK IN MINNESOTA AS A
SERVER, AND THEN THEY CAME OVER
HERE AND THEY REALIZED THAT
THEY'RE ONLY MAKING $2.33.
AND THEY'RE LIKE, "I'M LITERALLY
LOSING THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS BY
COMING OVER HERE IN WISCONSIN."
>> Reporter: AT THE BUTTER
BAKERY CAFEÉ IN MINNEAPOLIS,
MINNESOTA, WAITER ANDREW DUNN
SAYS BEING PAID THE STATE'S
REQUIRED $9-AN-HOUR MINIMUM WAGE
BEFORE TIPS IS A CRUCIAL SAFETY
NET.
>> THE AMOUNT I'M WORKING IS THE
MAXIMUM THAT I CAN WORK RIGHT
NOW.
AND I PAY ALL MY BILLS, BUT NOT
A LOT MORE.
SO, IT WOULD BE VERY HARD TO
HAVE MY BASE WAGE SLIP BELOW THE
MINIMUM WAGE.
WE HAVE THOSE SLOW MORNINGS
WHERE HARDLY ANYBODY COMES IN,
AND YOUR TIPS ARE REALLY LOW.
>> Reporter: IN TERMS OF THE
PERCENTAGE YOU TAKE HOME, ON
YOUR BEST DAY, WHAT PERCENTAGE
IS BASE WAGE AND WHAT PERCENT IS
TIP?
>> ON THE BEST DAY, I WOULD SAY
THAT MY BASE WAGE IS ABOUT HALF
AND MY TIPS ARE ABOUT HALF; AND
ON THE WORST DAY, MY BASE WAGE
IS ABOUT THREE-QUARTERS OF WHAT
I TAKE HOME AND MY TIPS ARE
ABOUT A QUARTER.
>> Reporter: BUTTER BAKERY CAFE
IS NOT A FULL SERVICE
RESTAURANT, SO THERE IS LESS
OPPORTUNITY FOR TIPPING SERVERS.
OWNER DAN SWENSON KLATT SAYS
PAYING HIS WORKERS A LIVING WAGE
HAS ALWAYS BEEN A PRIORITY.
>> CURRENTLY, I HAVE TO PAY A
LITTLE MORE BECAUSE THEY DON'T
SEE THE SAME LEVEL OF TIPS.
IF I KNEW THEY WERE GETTING A
LOT MORE TIPS, I MIGHT LOOK AT
DROPPING MY BASE WAGE A BIT MORE
BECAUSE IDEALLY IT'S ABOUT WHAT
THEY MAKE TOTAL, THE TOTAL
COMPENSATION.
>> Reporter: AT GRANDMA'S
RESTAURANT COMPANY IN DULUTH,
WHERE SERVERS CAN MAKE A HIGHER
AMOUNT OF TIPS, LESA MELBY IS
AFRAID THAT HER CUSTOMERS WILL
TIP HER LESS IF THEY LEARN OF
HER MINIMUM WAGE INCREASES.
>> I MAKE MORE MONEY OFF OF MY
TIPS THAN I DO MY PAYCHECK, AND
IF PEOPLE ARE GOING TO THINK
THAT I'M GETTING A HIGHER
MINIMUM WAGE, THEY'RE GOING TO
START TIPPING LESS OR NOT AT
ALL.
>> Reporter: AND GRANDMA'S
REGIONAL MANAGER, TONY BOEN,
SAYS THAT THE REQUIREMENT TO PAY
SERVERS MINIMUM WAGE HAS HAD
UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES AT THEIR
SIX RESTAURANTS.
FOR ONE, IT HAS INCREASED THE
WAGE DISPARITY BETWEEN THE
SERVING AND KITCHEN STAFF.
>> THE MANDATED MINIMUM WAGE
INCREASE WAS GIVING AN INCREASE
TO OUR MOST HIGHLY COMPENSATED
EMPLOYEES AT THE PERIL OF OUR
COOKS AND THE GUYS IN THE BACK
OF THE HOUSE, WHO DON'T MAKE
TIPS.
SO, WE NEEDED TO FIND A WAY--
AND WE STILL NEED TO FIND A
WAY-- TO BRIDGE THAT WAGE
DISPARITY.
SO, THAT'S A HUGE CHALLENGE FOR
US.
HOW CAN WE DO THAT?
>> Reporter: THEY'VE RAISED
PRICES TO COVER THE HIGHER LABOR
COSTS FOR THEIR 400 TO 600
EMPLOYEES-- THE NUMBER
FLUCTUATES DEPENDING ON THE
SEASON-- BUT BOEN SAYS THAT'S
NOT ENOUGH TO KEEP UP WITH
ONGOING MANDATORY MINIMUM WAGE
JUMPS.
THE NEXT ONE WILL BE IN AUGUST
FROM $9 TO $9.50 AN HOUR.
HAVE YOU EVER HAD A CUSTOMER
SAY, "HEY, WHY ARE YOUR PRICES
GOING UP?"
>> NO.
THEY DON'T SAY THAT.
>> Reporter: WHAT DO THEY SAY?
>> THEY JUST DON'T COME.
WE'VE CUT JOBS, WE'VE CUT HOURS.
WE CLOSED THREE RESTAURANTS THAT
BECAME UNPROFITABLE DUE TO
MINIMUM WAGE, PLUS SOME OTHER
FACTORS BUT THAT WAS A HUGE
FACTOR.
>> Reporter: ON THE OTHER HAND,
EMPLOYMENT IN THE HOSPITALITY
INDUSTRY IN STATES THAT PAY FULL
MINIMUM WAGE TO TIPPED WORKERS
ACTUALLY SAW STRONGER GROWTH
FROM 1995 TO 2014 THAN IN STATES
THAT PAY LESS.
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT RAISING THE
MINIMUM WAGE, WHAT CAN WE DO TO
HELP THE RESTAURANT OWNER?
>> I THINK, AS LONG AS YOU PHASE
IN THOSE INCREASES OVER TIME, IT
GIVES BUSINESSES TIME TO ADJUST.
WHEN YOU RAISE THE MINIMUM WAGE,
ALL OF THE COMPETITORS ARE ALSO
FACING THAT ADDITIONAL LABOR
COST.
SO, PRESUMABLY, THEY SHOULD BE
ABLE TO PASS THAT ADDITIONAL
COST ON THROUGH HIGHER PRICES
AND NO ONE'S GOING TO BE AT A
COMPETITIVE DISADVANTAGE.
I THINK THAT THE TIPPING SYSTEM
CREATES SOME UNIQUE CHALLENGES
THERE BECAUSE AT A HIGHER-END
RESTAURANT, THEY KNOW THAT THE
CLIENTELE PROBABLY HAS A LITTLE
MORE MONEY TO SPEND; THEY CAN
ABSORB THOSE PRICE INCREASES A
LITTLE MORE EASILY.
AT A, YOU KNOW, MORE FAMILY
DINING RESTAURANT, IT MIGHT BE A
LITTLE HARDER TO ABSORB THOSE
INCREASES.
>> Reporter: SOME RESTAURANTS
ARE ADDRESSING THE WAGE ISSUE BY
PAYING SERVERS LIKE OTHER
EMPLOYEES; WAIT STAFF RECEIVE A
HIGHER HOURLY RATE, BUT THE
RESTAURANT HAS A NO TIPPING
POLICY.
>> RIB-EYE, SEAT 9.
>> Reporter: THAT'S HOW CHEF AND
RESTAURANT OWNER ERICK HARCEY
RUNS HIS TWO MINNEAPOLIS
RESTAURANTS.
CUSTOMERS AT HIS VICTORY 44 AND
UPTON 43 ARE TOLD THEY SHOULD
NOT LEAVE A TIP.
>> A LOT OF IT WAS JUST SORT OF
TRYING TO GET IN FRONT OF SOME
OF THE CHANGE, THE POLICY.
THE MINIMUM WAGE IS GOING UP.
>> Reporter: SERVERS AT HIS
RESTAURANTS ARE PAID A STARTING
BASE SALARY OF $17 AN HOUR.
TO COVER THE COST, HE RAISED HIS
PRICES 18%, ABOUT THE EQUIVALENT
OF A TIP AT HIS RESTAURANT.
THE NO TIPPING POLICY ALSO HELPS
HIM PAY THE KITCHEN STAFF HIGHER
WAGES.
>> FOR THE SERVERS, IT MAY HAVE
AVERAGED OUT SLIGHTLY.
SOME ARE MAKING MORE, SOME MAYBE
SLIGHTLY LESS, BUT IT'S
GUARANTEED.
BUT FOR THE COOKS, THE
DISHWASHERS, THE HOSTS, THEY'RE
MAKING SUBSTANTIALLY MORE THAN
THEY HAVE IN THE PAST.
>> WE ARE GRATUITY-FREE, SO THE
NUMBER HERE IS YOUR TOTAL FOR
THE EVENING.
>> Reporter: HOW ARE YOU GOING
TO KNOW WHEN THIS HAS BEEN A
SUCCESS?
>> I FEEL IT'S A SUCCESS
ALREADY.
>> Reporter: REALLY?
WHY?
>> THE SUCCESS I'M GAUGING IS
THE FEEDBACK FROM THE GUESTS.
THEY'RE JUST... THEY LOVE THE
EXPERIENCE.
AND WHEN THEY LEAVE AND SAY,
"YOU KNOW WHAT, THIS WAS
PHENOMENAL SERVICE," THEY'RE
NOT, "OH, IT WAS BETTER BECAUSE
THERE WAS NO TIPS."
THEY'RE JUST STATING "THIS WAS
GREAT SERVICE."
AND THEN, AT THE END OF THE
NIGHT, I, YOU KNOW, I COUNT MY
CASH IN THE REGISTER.
THAT'S THE SUCCESS.
>> Thompson: LEARN MORE ABOUT
THE SCIENCE BEHIND WHY WE TIP.
READ OUR Q&A WITH CORNELL
UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR MICHAEL
LYNN ON OUR WEB SITE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
THIS WEEK IN MICHIGAN, THE STATE
LEGISLATURE APPROVED ALMOST $50
MILLION IN EMERGENCY AID TO KEEP
DETROIT'S PUBLIC SCHOOLS OPEN
AND OPERATING THROUGH THE END OF
THIS SCHOOL YEAR, AND A
SPOKESMAN FOR GOVERNOR RICK
SNYDER SAYS HE WILL SIGN THE
BILL EARLY NEXT WEEK.
THE MOVE COMES AS DETROIT'S
SCHOOL DISTRICT HAS SLIPPED
TOWARD BANKRUPTCY EVEN AS THE
CITY ITSELF HAS EMERGED FROM
BANKRUPTCY.
JOINING ME TO DISCUSS THE
CHALLENGES AHEAD IS "NEW YORK
TIMES" REPORTER KATE ZERNIKE.
SO, KATE, CAN YOU START OFF BY
PAINTING A PICTURE FOR US, JUST
HOW BAD IS IT FOR DETROIT'S
PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND WHAT HAS
CAUSED THIS?
>> DETROIT, LIKE MICHIGAN AS A
WHOLE, THEIR RECESSION HAS LOST
POPULATION, SO YOU HAVE A SCHOOL
DISTRICT THAT ONCE HAD 150,000
CHILDREN, PUBLIC SCHOOL DISTRICT
AND NOW HAS ABOUT 45,000
CHILDREN, SO THE SIZE OF IT HAS
GONE DOWN. AS CHILDREN HAVE LEFT
THE CITY, THE MONEY THAT GOES
WITH THOSE CHILDREN FROM THE
STATE AND FROM THE LOCAL TAX
REVENUES GOES WITH THE CHILDREN
TO CHARTER SCHOOLS, SUBURBAN
DISTRICTS. SO YOU JUST HAVE MUCH
LESS MONEY COMING IN THE
DISTRICT BECAUSE THERE ARE SO
MANY FEWER STUDENTS.
>> AND HAS A SIMILAR THING
HAPPENED IN OTHER DISTRICTS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY?
>> WELL, I THINK IN MANY WAYS
DETROIT IS EMBLEMATIC OF WHAT IS
HAPPENING IN STRUGGLING URBAN
DISTRICTS.
DETROIT HELPED THE CHARTER
SCHOOLS, AND A LOT OF CHARTER
SCHOOLS, THERE WAS A STATE
TAKEOVER, THE BOTTOM 5 % OF
PERFORMING SCHOOLS ARE PUT IN A
STATE-CONTROLLED AUTHORITY, BUT
AS ACROSS THE COUNTRY WE HAVEN'T
SEEN STATE TAKEOVERS NECESSARILY
MAKE THAT MUCH OF A DIFFERENCE,
FOR INSTANCE, IN NEWARK, SCHOOLS
HEAVILY CONTROLLED BY THE STATE
OF NEW JERSEY WITHOUT MUCH
IMPROVEMENT THERE AT ALL, SAME
THING WITH CAMERON, NEW JERSEY.
YOU KNOW, LOS ANGELES, THERE IS
A BIG BET ON CHARTER SCHOOLS
THERE, SO TRULY DETROIT HAS ALL
OF THE PROBLEMS.
>> Thompson: OTHER CITIES
HAVE A LOT OF KIDS GOING TO
CHARTER SCHOOLS THAT AREN'T SEEN
THIS TYPE OF PROBLEM.
YOU LOOK AT A STATE LIKE
MASSACHUSETTS, OR BOSTON,
BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOLS ARE DOING
WELL; YOU LOOK AT THEIR NATIONAL
RANKINGS, WASHINGTON, D.C.
HAS MADE ENORMOUS IMPROVEMENTS
IN THEIR CHARTER SCHOOLS AND THE
PUBLIC SCHOOLS, SO IT IS NOT AS
THOUGH CHARTER SCHOOLS ARE
NECESSARILY A BAD THING WHEN
THEY ARE DONE RIGHT. I JUST
THINK IN DETROIT THERE HAS NOT
BEEN MUCH OF AN EFFORT TO SORT
OF FIGURE OUT WHAT SCHOOLS DO WE
NEED, WHAT SCHOOLS ARE
PERFORMING WELL, SO YOU HAVE A
LOT OF EMPTY SEATS AND THERE IS
NO ANSWER IN LOOKING AT THE CITY
AND WHAT SCHOOLS DO WE NEED?
WHERE DO WE NEED SCHOOLS? WHERE
SHOULD THE MONEY BE GOING?
>> Thompson: SO WE SAW THIS
INFUSION OF $50 MILLION THAT THE
LEGISLATURE APPROVED THIS WEEK,
BUT THAT IS REALLY JUST A
SHORT-TERM SOLUTION IN DETROIT.
>> RIGHT.
>> Thompson: I MEAN, WHAT HAS
TO HAPPEN LONG-TERM TO MAKE SURE
THE SCHOOLS WILL BE SOLVENT?
>> PART OF THE PROPOSAL WAS THAT
THE GOVERNOR WHO IS A REPUBLICAN
AND THE MAYOR WHO ARE DEMOCRAT
ARE SUPPORTING SOMETHING CALLED
DETROIT EDUCATION COMMISSION.
THIS COMMISSION WOULD LOOK
AND SAY WHERE DO WE NEED
SCHOOLS, WHERE IS THE DEMAND,
WHERE SHOULD WE PUT THE
LIMITED RESOURCE WE HAVE?
THIS PROPOSAL FACES A STEEP
HURDLE IN THE MICHIGAN HOUSE, SO
I AM NOT SURE WHAT WILL HAPPEN.
BUT IN MICHIGAN THAT IS THE
NEXT DISCUSSION THEY WILL BE
HAVING.
>> Thompson: GREAT, KATE
ZERNIKE FROM THE "NEW YORK
TIMES," THANKS SO MUCH FOR BEING
HERE.
>> THANKS, MEGAN.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SATURDAY.
>> Thompson: THE U.S. NAVY HELD
A MEMORIAL SERVICE THIS WEEK FOR
56 SAILORS WHO DIED WHEN THEIR
WORLD WAR I ERA TUGBOAT SANK IN
A PACIFIC OCEAN STORM ALMOST A
CENTURY AGO.
AMONG THOSE IN ATTENDANCE WAS
THE GRANDDAUGHTER OF THE TUG'S
COMMANDING OFFICER.
THE NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: THE MYSTERY OF THE
U.S.S. "CONESTOGA" HAS BEEN
SOLVED.
ON MARCH 25, 1921, THE NAVY
TUGBOAT AND ITS CREW OF 56 SET
SAIL FROM SAN FRANCISCO FOR
HAWAII AND ITS FINAL
DESTINATION, AMERICAN SAMOA.
WHEN THE "CONESTOGA" FAILED TO
ARRIVE AT HONOLULU'S PEARL
HARBOR, THE NAVY LAUNCHED A
MASSIVE SEARCH MAINLY AROUND THE
HAWAIIAN ISLANDS.
AFTER THREE MONTHS, THE NAVY
DECLARED THE TUG AND CREW LOST.
88 YEARS LATER, IN 2009, THE
NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC
ADMINISTRATION, OR NOAA,
DETECTED AN UNCHARTED SHIPWRECK
IN SHARK-INFESTED WATERS 30
MILES WEST OF SAN FRANCISCO.
WITH SONAR IMAGING AND VIDEO
FOOTAGE RECORDED ALMOST 200 FEET
UNDERWATER, NOAA FOUND THE
"CONESTOGA" LARGELY INTACT WITH
MARINE LIFE GROWING ON ITS
EXTERIOR.
BUT NO HUMAN REMAINS WERE FOUND.
FOR NEARLY A CENTURY, THE
TUGBOAT WAS NEVER FAR FROM WHERE
ITS FATAL JOURNEY BEGAN.
>> Thompson: PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
HISTORIC TRIP TO CUBA THIS WEEK
WAS A HARD ACT TO FOLLOW, BUT
THE ROLLING STONES GAVE IT A
SHOT WITH THEIR FIRST VISIT TO
THE COMMUNIST-RULED ISLAND.
♪
THE LEGENDARY BRITISH ROCK N'
ROLL BAND-- FORMED ONLY THREE
YEARS AFTER FIDEL CASTRO SEIZED
POWER IN 1959-- GAVE A FREE
CONCERT LAST NIGHT IN HAVANA
BEFORE A CROWD ESTIMATED AT
500,000 FANS.
THE STONES PLAYED A TWO-HOUR SET
FEATURING 18 OF THEIR GREATEST
HITS.
ONE 57-YEAR-OLD CONCERTGOER
SAID, "I'VE WAITED MY WHOLE LIFE
FOR THIS."
>> Thompson: RETURNING TO THE
DEMOCRATIC CAUCUSES HELD IN
THREE STATES TODAY, BERNIE
SANDERS WON ALASKA AND WAS FAR
AHEAD OF HILLARY CLINTON IN
EARLY RETURNS FROM WASHINGTON
STATE, TELLING SUPPORTERS
TONIGHT HIS CAMPAIGN HAS
MOMENTUM.
RESULTS FROM HAWAII ARE EXPECTED
LATER TONIGHT.
THE NEXT BIG DOMINATING CONTEST
FOR BOTH PARTIES IS THE
WISCONSIN PRIMARY ON APRIL 5,
TEN DAYS FROM NOW.
YOU CAN FOLLOW ALL OF THE VOTE
2016 RESULTS ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
AND THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M MEGAN THOMPSON.
GOOD NIGHT.